You can remember only maybe two or three. We had a
guy named Rodney Gott, whose
father was
president of I think the American Foundry or
something like that. And he used to come up in a
great big long Cadillac.
And we had maybe two or three others that that were
in that category, but otherwise why you had
individuals who were from the coal mines of West
Virginia and who hadn't even had graduated from
high school. Really? You had some students who
were your colleagues that hadn't graduated from
high school? They'd gone to one of these prep
schools. Oh, I see. Prep to be able to pass exams,
Joe Remus. And
of course, he worked all the time. I mean, he
studied all the time. But he got through.
And Tom Kilday was another one from Texas. And then
we had another classmate from Bonham, Texas.
and then we had Cam Longley from a little small town
up in West Texas. So,
other than the people were from the northeast,
why, and you, see you didn't have any
fraternization with these people because see,
when you entered the military academy in July in
29, the first time that you were permitted to get a
leave was 18 months later. I mean, you had a
Christmas vacation, and then after your
sophomore year, between your sophomore year and
your junior year, you came home. I came to Texas.
That was the only time I came back to Texas. During
the time, and then your parents don't come up. I
mean, it's too expensive to come up. And most of
these people, you never see your parents. And so
you don't, you don't associate an individual that
he's a son of a millionaire or, because you never,
you wear the same clothes, you have the same
allowances, you can't, they're not supposed to
give you any money, and you're supposed to earn
all, you have a bank account type of thing, and you
buy your books and your clothing, and get your
cadet store type of activities all out of your own
little bank account. You just wrote checks for
these things. So everybody was treated exactly
the same. Did you like that aspect of your
education? I was for that because I didn't have to
worry about finances. No, I mean the fact that
everybody was treated the same. Well, you didn't
really think about it. I mean, I don't think you
really gave it a lot of thought. You just accepted
it. You just accepted it. And you didn't object to
it. I mean, that's the way it was. If you want to stay
there, that's where you abide by the rules and
regulations. And as far as standing in conduct,
I guess I was a complier type. I mean, I wasn't the
one that was not, didn't comply with the
regulations. Whatever the regulations were,
that was for me. Now you talked about at A&M Corps,
there was a Spreedy Corps, was that same feeling,
that same spirit at West Point? Yeah, oh yeah. In
larger or less dose, or could you compare it? Oh, I
would say certainly about equal. And of course, I
think that the cadet who goes to Texas A&M, who
spends four years there and gets to know all of his
classmates,
I think he gets the same outlook, the same suite of
core as you do at the military academy.
And the fact that you know everybody, you know the
people who are playing football,
And I played football. You played football at West
Point? Oh, yeah. I was on about the third team. I
passed. I caught half. You were an end? I was an end.
I sat on the seat on the bench before 110,000 in
Soldier's Field. I caught passes between halves.
Oh, you'd get in the game before you got 50 ahead or
something of that sort. And... And I was on the
boxing team, and I played lacrosse.
Were sports emphasized at West Point? Well,
football, yes. I would say that football, I would
say your first team at that time in football were
individuals who had already made a name for
themselves at some college, like Chris Cagle,
Some of them were all Americans before they went to
military academy. So
football, but basketball, boxing, fencing,
swimming, there
are certain things that you had to do. You had to
learn how to swim. So there's certain types of
athletes you had to learn how to fence. You also had
to learn how to box. And
there's certain intramural athletes that you had
to participate in and become proficient in. Why
fencing? Well, it's one of these,
I guess, graceful skills that you that you
participate in. That was one of the programs that
you had to take sometime during your four year
period. Now, here is a Texan from a small town who
had never been out of Texas before arriving on the
Hudson River in New York. What were your
impressions of New England? Well, I met Tom
Kilday. He was from San Antonio, I think. So I'd
gotten in touch with him, and I'd met him at
Franklin, Texas, and I boarded the same train that
he
He had already been four years in college. He did?
Yeah, he had already been. He had graduated from
St. Edward's before he had gone to military
academy. So I met him there and we went to St. Louis
and then St. Louis to New York and spent the night in
New York and then caught the train up from New York.
I had him to follow around and we didn't tarry
anywhere until we got to the military cabin. Of
course you were met at the station and by the time
you got up on the
military reservation there was a bunch of cadets
around you making you pick up your baggage, drop
it, pick it up, drop it. this type of thing. They
started from there to indoctrinate you to obey
commands.
I don't know. Did you like New England versus
Texas? Well, New England is a very puritano type of
country. I mean, it's a really pretty country,
particularly in the fall, particularly in the
springtime. And, of course, we went up there in
July. And it, of course, was pretty at the time. I
don't really have any thoughts as far as leaving.
I'd say the train ride from Reagan, Texas to Tyler
was a lot more impressive because that's the first
time you'd ever been away from home. And you really
had to spend very many nights away from home. Sure.
And getting on a train with,
you remember that type of thing. But as far as the
train ride from Texas to West Point, really I don't
remember too much about it. Okay, now let's talk
for a minute about the, after you graduated from
West Point and received your commission as the
second lieutenant, and later on in your military
career, what was your opinion as a West Point
graduate of the commissioned officers who had
received their training from Texas A&M?
Well, there's been a lot of comment, I'd say, that
the West Pointers were were stuck up and always got
the best jobs. Yeah, I heard that quite a bit. I
don't really think that that is true in the Air
Force. When I graduated from the Military
Academy, I ranked 66 out of 346. And
had I ranked a little higher, I wanted the Corps of
Engineers. And I think the Corps of Engineers
quota went down to about 56, because everybody
didn't select the Corps of Engineers. But you got
your, you selected your branch of service by how
you ranked. The number of guys ranked number one,
he got his choice. Ranked number two, number
three, and on down to 66. Well, then I had to select
the Coastal Artillery. I selected the Coastal
Artillery as my choice, except Then you had to wait
two years after you graduated from the Military
Academy to transfer to the Corps of Engineers. So I
said, well, I'll just take the Air Corps
because I did pass the physical. And then that'll
be one year while you learn to fly, and then you just
have one more year to wait until you could go to the
Corps of Engineers. And of course I was basically
I'm sure back to the architectural construction
type of business that I was really interested in.
And then I passed the physical exam so everybody
who passed the physical exam could come to the
flying school. And of course
The flying school is a great equalizer as far as
people are concerned because some of them, about
50% of them, graduated from flying school and 50%
didn't. And so when you graduate from the flying
school, I would say that a very small proportion, I
don't know exactly what it would be, but I would say
certainly less than 25% of the officer corps were
military graduates. You mean West Point
graduates? Yeah, West Point graduates. And the
rest of them were from Texas A&M, et cetera. And I
know in the Air Force you really didn't look to see
Of course you knew who your classmates were and of
course, but very seldom were you ever stationed
with your classmates. Most of the people that you
had around you were non-graduates
of the military academy. They were graduates of
Texas A&M or almost any college. And
you very seldom run into any animosity between
graduates and non-graduates. I think probably
General Powers, who commanded SAC later,
when I was in SAC in 56, 57, 58, did I run into the fact
that he objected to military academy graduates.
He was a non-military graduate. But otherwise, I
don't think it affected you at all. Because I've
heard from some A&M graduates that a West Point
graduate is more conceited, more haughty. And
just for a couple of years, they were more
clannish. And for a couple of years, it was rather
difficult to get along, if you were both second
lieutenants, to get along with a West Point man.
Now after that, they say it doesn't seem to make
much difference. What do you think about that?
Well, I think really your problem there is that
when you graduate from the Kelly and arrive at your
first base at, say, Fort Island, Luke Field. Of
course, you have about five or maybe five people
who report in at the same time. You know them.
You've been talking to them for the last five
years, four years or five years. Your classmates
that arrived at Randolph and went to the same class
with you at Randolph and Kelly, of course you've
only known them for one year. And I think normally
and naturally why you talk and you congregate with
the people that you've known so long. And they've
been your friends for that long. But after that,
why...
Well, by 1940, a lot of times I would be the only West
Point graduate on the base. I would have saved 400
officers.
I don't know. In your opinion, which institution,
A&M or West Point, produces a better caliber of
officer?
Well, I would say it's really hard to say. I would
say it's really hard to say. I think it really
depends upon the individual. I think it really
depends on the individual as to how he reacts to
situations.
The units that I commanded the air divisions by You
couldn't really distinguish between a Texas A&M
graduate and a West Point graduate. Would you say
the same thing as far as which institution
produces a leader, that it depends more on the
individual? I would say it really depends on the
individual. I don't really think West Point makes
a leader. I mean, I think they're too regimented. I
think they're really very regimentated. as far as
they do all the thinking for you. Whereas I think
that if you probably get more thinkers
that attend outside colleges. Does A&M make
leaders? Well, I don't think that through your
college years that you really produce any
leaders. I really don't think that, I think it's
really after you get out of college, maybe the
course is, well it's very difficult to, in a
classroom of descriptive geometry or chemistry,
say this guy's going to be a leader and this guy's
not going to be a leader. There's no way of
distinguishing.
All you're doing is teaching a guy how to think. OK.
Now, not only are we talking about two different
types of institutions that produces officers.
We've been talking about West Point. We've been
talking about the core schools like Texas A&M. And
of course, we could also mention VMI and Virginia
Tech. What about the ROTC schools? What about all
the other land grant schools that have ROTC
programs? What did you think of the caliber of
those ROTC graduates?
Well, I really never had an opportunity to
compare. You really don't think of, when you look
at Captain Joe Blow, whether or not he's a graduate
of Texas A&M or SMU or Houston or wherever they have
an ROTC program, you really look at him as an
individual. and whether or not he's willing to
accept responsibility and whether or not he's a
pusher or whether or not he's a follower or
whatever. So you really don't sit down and compare
individuals.
Now, in my master's thesis, I made a study of 100
commanders, base commanders, wing commanders,
division commanders, as to the type of education
that they had. What did you find? Well, you found
that about a third of them didn't have any college
education at all. And yet they had been selected by
somebody as being a commander. And I made a study of
on whether or not they had graduated from a
professional school in the military, whether or
not the Air Command Staff School, Air War College,
National War College, Industrial College. And
again, a third of them had been to no professional
school in the Air Force, 34 percent.
What did you conclude? Well, I concluded that
Well, it's hard to conclude anything, really. You
look at the graduates of the National War College,
one of the individuals who was selected for
attending the National War College, and only
about 2% of the officer corps
were going to attend the National War College.
Normally, as I remember, about 60% of those became
a general officer. But see, you were selecting the
top, theoretically, the top 2% of the officer
corps anyway to go to school. So a large percentage
of them normally would go. High probability that
they would go. That they would go. And
I really think that you really don't have to go to
college to become a military leader. I think you
just have to have that knack of handling people and
being able to have ideas and be decisive and get
willing to rock the boat. So as far as comparing
graduates various colleges. I don't think it, I
don't think you really, I really had an
opportunity to look at each individual.
You did make an interesting statement though. You
said that men at West Point were
not as, did you say not as likely to have ideas as
ROTC graduates or something like something to
that extent? Well, during your college years at
West Point, I would say that now I'm going to
understand they've changed the curriculum now so
that you have a lot of choice. When I went there, you
didn't have a choice. You just took this course and
out of this book, and this is the way it's to be
taught. And
you didn't... didn't even read a newspaper. So to
me why
you learn a lot more in going to school and decide
what courses you're going to take and how you're
going to make the money to go to college. And
I would say that would certainly improve your
ability to
make a success, whether or not it's in the military
or whether or not it's in civilian life. Many
times, let's change the topic for a minute. Many
times I've read quite a bit on military history,
especially journalists, other people who report
on the military talk about what they call the
military mentality. There's a military way to do
things. Is there such a thing as a military
mentality? Well, in the military you have,
and in government, You have a tremendous amount of
regulations to follow. And
your military mentality really is controlled by
military regulations. And
you really don't have an opportunity to try new
things. that is
not in accordance with the rules and regulations.
Okay, okay. So you get in, you're regimented in
that way. In other
words, what you would define as a military
mentality is more regimentation, or more narrow
maybe? It's more controlled. Once
you
get up into your more responsible jobs, not that
you are limited to ways of doing things.
when I went to Sioux Falls, South Dakota to
establish a radio school up there, you really, you
could freewheel all you wanted to as long as you
stayed within the budget and you could come up with
all kinds of ideas on how to build mock-ups for
various radio circuits and you could go out and
establish
a collection center for all of the old radios in the
state of South Dakota and North Dakota and
Minnesota and Wisconsin and bring them in, tear
them up and
that type of thing was encouraged. Exactly what
you taught in the schools using the teaching
methods that you had developed was pretty well set
down by a bunch of educators, of which I was one, I
guess. That you have a big seminar and decide on
almost a day-to-day basis what is to be taught. And
I think it has to be. If you're going to teach 14,000
students,
In 16 weeks, a radio course that you come out of the
profession, you have to do, it has to be done on a
day-to-day basis. And you want those men to have
similar training so they can communicate when
they get out in the field. That's right.
Let's talk about your graduation. Graduated from
West Point right in the middle of the Great
Depression. Wonderful. Wonderful that you had a
job. Yeah, that's just exactly what I was going to
ask. I bet you were quite happy to have a job at that
time. Happy to have a job. We had a ten percent pay
cut as a cycle lieutenant, but it didn't bother me.
And I bought a 1930 Ford Roadster for two hundred
dollars when I graduated. In 1932? 1930 Ford
Roadster, and I bought it when I graduated in 1933.
Oh, in 1933. So you bought a pretty new car for a
young man to have during the Depression. Yeah, for
$200, and I drove it home. No, I would say it was very
nice to have a job. And talking to my classmates at
at Texas A&M who graduated then in 32, why so many of
them didn't have a job. Very few of them had jobs.
They went out and sold apples on the corners and
things of that sort.
I think in talking to them is where you really have a
story as to how they progressed from the apple cart
up to a wholesale grocery company or something of
this sort. There were a lot of successful people in
that class of 32. Now, what was your first
assignment as a second lieutenant? At Randolph,
the flying school. Okay, can you tell me about
that? Well, reported in and of course I really
wasn't real concerned about learning to fly,
whether or not I graduated or not graduated, to
learn to fly or not fly, because I was going to
transfer to the engineers anyway, so
I guess I just relaxed. The people, some of the boys
who had been looking forward since they were ten
years old to be a pilot, they just washed out
because they just froze up and what have you. But I
didn't have any problem of learning to fly. Of
course your mechanical engineering part of
studying engines and aerodynamics and weather
and all the ground schools, I was pretty well duck
soup. That was no problem for you? No problem, no.
and I went to Kelly and went through bombardment,
which was, at that time we were flying Keystone
bombers, a two-engine airplane, and that was my
type. I wanted to pursue, I was a conservative type
and I liked the bombardment. So I had no problem at
all of learning to fly and of course Once you learn
to fly I guess it's just like being a gambler or
being an alcoholic or something else. It gets in
your blood and I just stayed with it. Now this is not
the exact time but fairly close to the Billy
Mitchell problem. Do you remember that?